docs: Add ADR 009 for consistent watcher terminology (#3502)
kyma-project/lifecycle-manager: docs/contributor/adr/009-consistent-watcher-terminology.md

A reader who moves between the code, the manifests, and the documentation must repeatedly re-map one concept onto several names. This slows down onboarding, makes incident response harder, and hides the actual structure of the PKI.

This ADR defines one vocabulary for the mechanism and its PKI, and records the target name for every part in every layer. It extends the naming guidelines of [ADR 005](005-consistent-naming.md) and reuses the certificate vocabulary of [ADR 007](007-pki-certs-and-rotation.md).

## Decision

Names describe function in the solution domain. A name states what a thing is and what role it plays, not where it happens to sit or how it was bootstrapped. The same concept uses the same name in code, configuration, and documentation.

### Canonical Terms

The following canonical terms apply to the mechanism and its parts:

| Concept | Canonical Term | Definition |
|---------|----------------|------------|
| The mechanism, on the Kyma Control Plane (KCP) side | Watcher | The KCP-side mechanism that receives change notifications from runtimes. Covers the Watcher custom resource, the Watcher controller, and the Istio routing KLM configures for it. |

> | The deployed agent, on the runtime side | Runtime Watcher | The separate component from the `runtime-watcher` repository that KLM deploys into the runtime. The term refers only to that component and its image. |

Reviewer: Overall I am fine but also a bit unsure about this. I think it just leaves room for confusion open why it is called "watcher" on one side, and "runtime watcher" on the other .I think I would prefer if we go for "watcher" uniformly. We can also rename the repo accordingly.

Also the entire "runtime" term is debatable. We also use the synonyms "SKR" and "remote" sometimes. Maybe it would be easier if we get rid of it here if we can.

| `klm-watcher-serving` | Certificate | `klm-watcher-ca`             | It is the CA certificate, which also serves as the server certificate.           |
| `klm-watcher` | Secret      | `klm-watcher-ca`             | Stores the CA certificate. Matches the Certificate name.                         |
| `klm-istio-gateway` | Secret      | `klm-watcher-server`         | Stores the server certificate and the CA bundle used by the gateway.             |
| `klm-watcher-selfsigned` | Issuer      | `klm-watcher-client`         | It is the CA Issuer that signs client certificates. It is not self-signed.       |
| `{KYMA_NAME}-webhook-tls` | Certificate | `{KYMA_NAME}-watcher-client` | Requests a client certificate on KCP, one per runtime.                           |
| `{KYMA_NAME}-webhook-tls` | Secret      | `{KYMA_NAME}-watcher-client` | Stores a client certificate on KCP, one per runtime. Matches the Certificate name. |
| `skr-webhook-tls` | Secret      | `runtime-watcher-client`     | The client certificate and CA bundle synced to the runtime.                      |

> | `skr-webhook` | Deployment  | `runtime-watcher`            | The Runtime Watcher deployment in the runtime.                                   |

Reviewer: These are just two of the runtime resources. There are many more https://github.com/kyma-project/lifecycle-manager/blob/main/skr-webhook/resources.yaml

The following diagram shows these Issuers, Certificates, and Secrets under their target names, and how the certificates flow from KCP to the runtime:

![Watcher PKI certificate and secret flow under the target names](../assets/adr-009/watcher-pki-names.svg)

#### Command-Line Flags

The `--self-signed-cert-*` flags are renamed to `--watcher-client-cert-*`, because they configure the per-runtime client certificate, not the CA certificate. The `--self-signed-cert-issuer-*` flags name the Issuer that signs those client certificates, so they follow the same `client-cert` prefix.

| Current Flag | Target Flag |
|--------------|-------------|
| `--self-signed-cert-duration` | `--watcher-client-cert-duration` |
| `--self-signed-cert-renew-before` | `--watcher-client-cert-renew-before` |
| `--self-signed-cert-renew-buffer` | `--watcher-client-cert-renew-buffer` |
| `--self-signed-cert-key-size` | `--watcher-client-cert-key-size` |
| `--self-signed-cert-issuer-name` | `--watcher-client-cert-issuer-name` |
| `--self-signed-cert-issuer-namespace` | `--watcher-client-cert-issuer-namespace` |

> The duration, renewal, and key size of the CA certificate are not configured by any flag. They are set on the CA Certificate resource in `config/certmanager/certificate_watcher.yaml`. Naming these flags after the CA would imply control the flags do not have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The duration, renewal, and key size of the CA certificate are not configured by any flag. They are set on the CA Certificate resource in `config/[certmanager|gardener-certmanager]/certificate_watcher.yaml`.
```

Last sentence doesn't make sense I think.

> #### Go Identifiers

Reviewer: I think we should also include the IstioGatewaySecret controller. Package is `istiogatewaysecret`. Controller name is `istio-controller`. The service is in package `gatewaysecret`.

I think it should be named around the "server certificate" canonical term.

> | Concept | Current | Target |

Reviewer: There are more private funcs. Not sure if we need to include all of them in the ADR, but in the refactoring we also need to consider them. Example from the gateway secret handler:

- `createGatewaySecretFromRootSecret` outdated terminology 
- `requiresCertSwitching` should be more specific => `requiresServerCertSwitching`

The variable spellings for the `caAddedToBundleAt` annotation converge on one form. The annotation is `caAddedToBundleAt`. Code currently reads it through variables named `caBundleExtendedAt`, `caBundledAt`, and `getGatewaySecretCaBundleExtendedAtTime`. The target uses `caAddedToBundleAt` consistently.

#### Documentation

Documentation uses the canonical terms. Kubernetes resource names in component tables and reference material are updated to the target names. Existing documents are updated as they are touched.

### Migration

Kubernetes resource names, secret names, and command-line flags are operational contracts. Live landscapes reference them, and the Watcher PKI performs zero-downtime certificate rotation (see ADR 007), so a name cannot simply change in place without breaking the mTLS trust chain.

Renames of these contracts follow a transition that keeps the old and new names valid at the same time:

1. Introduce the new name alongside the old one.
2. Migrate producers and consumers to the new name.

> 3. Remove the old name once no landscape references it.

Reviewer: I think here we need to think in more detail and align whether we accept a short downtime for simplicity or not.

Even with downtime, we also need to check if we have residues after renaming. E.g., I think cert manager does not automatically remove secrets for certs not existing any longer. Also not sure if the watcher sync prunes old resources similar to Manifest reconciler.

I think this is also a good opportunity to think about re-platforming the watcher sync approach in general. As of now, it is a super proprietary mechanism in KLM detached from existing means. We already had some ideas for improving including:

- watcher as mandatory module. Key challenge here was the handling of the certificate secret. But actually we have more or less resolved this challenge already: https://github.com/kyma-project/lifecycle-manager/pull/3364
- separate controller for watcher. Kyma controller only creates the client cert. The separate controller watches the client cert and reconciles the necessary watcher resources on the runtime
- watcher as gardener extension

Author: After discussing this, we decided to use the migration section to list the aufwand involved in the migration rather than the concrete steps. The actual approach, including whether we accept a short downtime and how we handle residues like leftover cert-manager secrets or watcher sync resources, will be decided in the issues we create after this ADR. The re-platforming ideas you raised are good input for those follow up issues too.
